.TH ANDON 1 "2026-03-17" "andon 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
andon \- signal-routing daemon
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B andon
.RI [ OPTIONS ]
.I config.toml
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B andon
reads a TOML configuration file and starts a
signal-routing pipeline.
Binary
.RB ( On / Off )
signals flow from
.I sources
through optional logic
.I nodes
to
.IR sinks .
.PP
On startup:
.IP 1. 4
All Meross alarm sinks are turned off.
.IP 2. 4
All sink connections are established (login, device
lookup, \&etc.).
.IP 3. 4
Sources begin emitting.
.PP
On receipt of
.B SIGINT
or
.BR SIGTERM ,
all Meross alarm sinks are turned off and the process
exits.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h\fR,\fB \-\-help
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-V\fR,\fB \-\-version
Print the version string and exit.
.
.SH CONFIGURATION FILE
The configuration file is TOML.
It contains up to three arrays of tables:
.BR [[source]] ,
.BR [[node]] ,
and
.BR [[sink]] .
All three are optional.
.PP
Every entry requires a
.B type
field (selects the implementation) and a
.B name
field (unique across all sources, nodes, and sinks).
Sources and nodes also require a
.B sinks
array that lists the names of downstream nodes or sinks.
.
.SS Sources
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqurl\(dq
Poll an HTTP endpoint on a schedule.
Emits
.B On
when a check fails (connection error, non-2xx status, or
pattern mismatch);
.B Off
when it passes.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B url
URL to poll (required).
.TP
.B interval
Mean time between polls; see
.B DURATIONS
(required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.TP
.B timeout
Per-request timeout; default
.B 10s
(optional).
.TP
.B stddev
Standard deviation for Gaussian jitter applied to
.BR interval .
Each inter-poll sleep is sampled from
.RI Normal( interval , stddev ),
clamped to zero (optional).
.TP
.B pattern
Rust regular expression.
The response body is tested with
.I is_match
(not a full-string match).
If the body does not match, the signal is
.B On
(optional).
.RE
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqcron\(dq
Emit
.B On
at times matching a cron schedule and
.B Off
after a fixed duration.
Times are interpreted in the local timezone.
If the
.B On
period has not ended when the next scheduled time
arrives, the current period runs to completion first.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B cron
Six-field cron expression in local time:
.I "sec min hour day-of-month month day-of-week"
(required).
Standard wildcards
.RB ( * ),
ranges
.RB ( 1\-5 ),
and step values
.RB ( */2 )
are supported.
.TP
.B duration
How long the signal stays
.BR On ;
see
.B DURATIONS
(required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.RE
.
.SS Nodes
.PP
Connect a source to a node the same way you connect it
to a sink: list the node's
.B name
in the source's
.B sinks
array.
All nodes track each input source independently (keyed
by name) and only forward a signal when their output
changes.
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqnot\(dq
Logic NOT.
Emits
.B On
when
.I all
inputs are
.BR Off ;
.B Off
when
.I any
input is
.BR On .
Emits
.B On
immediately at startup (vacuous case: no inputs yet).
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.RE
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqand\(dq
Logic AND.
Emits
.B On
when
.I all
inputs are
.BR On ;
.B Off
when
.I any
input is
.BR Off .
Does not emit until the first message is received.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.RE
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqor\(dq
Logic OR.
Emits
.B On
when
.I any
input is
.BR On ;
.B Off
when
.I all
inputs are
.BR Off .
Does not emit until the first message is received.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.RE
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqxor\(dq
Logic XOR.
Emits
.B On
when an
.I odd
number of inputs are
.BR On ;
.B Off
otherwise.
Does not emit until the first message is received.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.RE
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqdelay\(dq
Turn-on delay gate.
Emits
.B On
only after at least one input has been continuously
.B On
for the configured delay.
Emits
.B Off
immediately when
.I all
inputs go
.BR Off .
If any input goes
.B Off
before the delay elapses the timer is cancelled and
.B On
is never emitted for that period.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B delay
Minimum continuous
.B On
duration before output fires; see
.B DURATIONS
(required).
.TP
.B sinks
Downstream names (required).
.RE
.
.SS Sinks
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqlog\(dq
Write every signal change to standard error via the
tracing subscriber.
.RS
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.RE
.
.TP
.B type = \(dqmeross\(dq
Control a Meross smart plug via the Meross cloud API.
Turns the plug
.B on
when any connected source is
.BR On ;
turns it
.B off
when all connected sources are
.BR Off .
Only issues a cloud command when the desired state
changes.
.PP
.RS
Meross sinks are treated as
.IR alarms :
they are turned off unconditionally at startup and again
at shutdown, regardless of the current signal state.
.TP
.B name
Unique name (required).
.TP
.B device
Device name exactly as shown in the Meross app
(required).
.TP
.B email
Meross account e-mail address (required).
.TP
.B password
Meross account password in plaintext (required).
Restrict read access to the config file with
.BR "chmod 600" .
.TP
.B region
API region:
.BR eu ,
.BR us ,
or
.B ap
(default
.BR us ),
or a full HTTPS base URL for a non-standard endpoint
(optional).
.TP
.B channel
Relay channel index; 0 is the main outlet on
single-outlet devices (default
.BR 0 )
(optional).
.RE
.
.SS Durations
Duration strings are parsed by the
.I humantime
library.
Examples:
.RS
.TS
l l.
\fB30s\fR	30 seconds
\fB1m\fR	1 minute
\fB1m30s\fR	90 seconds
\fB2h\fR	2 hours
\fB1h30m\fR	90 minutes
.TE
.RE
.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B RUST_LOG
Controls log verbosity using the
.I tracing-subscriber
filter syntax.
The default level is
.BR debug .
.PP
.RS
Examples:
.PP
.RS
.EX
RUST_LOG=info  andon config.toml
RUST_LOG=warn  andon config.toml
RUST_LOG=andon=info,andon::sources::url=debug  andon config.toml
.EE
.RE
.RE
.
.SH SIGNALS
.TP
.B SIGINT\fR,\fB SIGTERM
Initiate graceful shutdown: turn off all alarm sinks
then exit.
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit (all tasks completed or shutdown signal received).
.TP
.B 1
Configuration error, missing sink name, or startup
failure.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Simple health-check alarm
Turn on a plug when a health endpoint starts failing.
.PP
.EX
[[source]]
type     = "url"
name     = "api"
url      = "https://api.example.com/health"
interval = "30s"
sinks    = ["alarm"]

[[sink]]
type     = "meross"
name     = "alarm"
device   = "Alarm Light"
email    = "user@example.com"
password = "s3cr3t"
region   = "eu"
.EE
.
.SS On-call window with debounce
Fire only during business hours and only after the
service has been down for 30 seconds continuously.
.PP
.EX
[[source]]
type     = "url"
name     = "api"
url      = "https://api.example.com/health"
interval = "30s"
stddev   = "5s"
timeout  = "5s"
pattern  = "\e"status\e":\e"ok\e""
sinks    = ["alarm-gate"]

[[source]]
type     = "cron"
name     = "on-call"
cron     = "0 0 8 * * Mon-Fri"
duration = "10h"
sinks    = ["alarm-gate"]

[[node]]
type  = "and"
name  = "alarm-gate"
sinks = ["debounce"]

[[node]]
type  = "delay"
name  = "debounce"
delay = "30s"
sinks = ["alarm"]

[[sink]]
type     = "meross"
name     = "alarm"
device   = "Alarm Light"
email    = "user@example.com"
password = "s3cr3t"
region   = "eu"
.EE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemd.unit (5),
.BR crontab (5),
.BR chmod (1)
